# Variable_DC_Power_Supply
Simulate on PROTEUS
0V-30V Variable DC Power Supply with maximum Load current of 1.5A
In this project we use 36V transformer that converts 230VRMS to 36V AC.
Then this 36V AC becomes the input of Full Wave Bridge Rectifier that converts the 36V AC into the Pulsating DC 36V.

For Pure DC we add 4700uF capacitor that reduce ripple in the circuit.
1mF capacitor next to 4700uF is also used to reduce ripple. In most applications, that 1mF capacitor is used if we add some circuit after 4700uF capacitor.
That circuit generate a ripple and that rippleis compensate by 1mF capacitor.

Next to 1mF capacitor we added a LM317S voltage regulator(1.5A)--1.25V - 30V--

Potentiometer and Resistance R1 creates a voltage divider circuit.
10uF capacitor reduce the ripple generated by Adjust pin of regulator.
Diodes D4 and D5 are used to prevent 10uF cap and 1mF cap from discharging at voltage regulator output.

# Project Statement
Design and simulate a variable power supply which takes an AC input of 230V rms at 50 Hz and
gives a DC output that can vary in the range of 0-30V and maximum output load current should
be 1-1.5A.
In this project we will design a Transformer Based Linear Convert to convert 230 rms AC to 0-
30V DC with max load current of 1 – 1.5A.

# Components Required
• 230 rms AC voltage source
• Transformer (230 rms to 36V)
• Diodes
• Capacitors
• Resistors
• Potentiometer
• LM317S (1.5A Adjustable Output Positive Voltage Regulator)

# Design Explanation
Firstly, the AC input (230V rms) given to the transformer. Transformer convert the 230V rms to
36V AC. Then the Full Wave rectifier convert the 36V AC to 36V DC pulsating DC. This ripple
of voltage is compensated by the filter that converts that DC signal to smoother DC signal. Next
to filter we use LM317S voltage regulator that regulate the signal and make it more smoother
means remove more ripples.

# Transformer
We use step-down transformer in the design. A step-down transformer is a type of transformer,
which converts high voltage at primary side to low voltage at the secondary side. If we speak in
terms of coil winding, the primary winding of step-down transformer has more turn than the
AC Transformer Full Wave
Rectifier
Filter
LM317S Regulator circuit Protection
Circuit
Load
secondary winding. In this project, we step down the 230V rms to 36V DC. As we use
Proteus for the simulation so, it takes primary and secondary inductance as input to
convert the voltage. So, we have calculated inductance ratio by using formula given in design
calculation section. We take 81H as primary inductance and 1H as secondary inductance.

# Full Wave Bridge Rectifier
Next to transformer there is a full wave bridge rectifier is connected. It uses four diodes connect
in a way like Wheatstone bridge
The four diodes labelled D1 to D4 are arranged in “series pairs” with only two diodes conducting
current during each half cycle.
• The Positive Half-cycle
During the positive half cycle of the supply, diodes D1 and D2 conduct in series while
diodes D3 and D4 are reverse biased and the current flows through the load as shown below.
• The Negative Half-cycle
During the negative half cycle of the supply, diodes D3 and D4 conduct in series, but
diodes D1 and D2 switch “OFF” as they are now reverse biased. The current flowing through
the load is the same direction as before.
Filter for Pulsating DC
After Bridge rectifier, we use filter for pulsating DC that remove the ripple from the DC signal
and make it smoother. If we use capacitor of low value then the DC signal not fully smooth there
is a ripple in it. And if we use capacitor of high value then the load current may not be the same
as we want. So, we use capacitor of 4700uF and 1mF capacitor in parallel that make the signal
smooth.

# LM317S Voltage Regulator
LM317 is used for the voltage regulation. LM317 is a monolithic positive voltage regulator IC.
Being monolithic, all the components are inbuilt on the same semiconductor chip making the IC
small in size having less power consumption and low cost. The IC has three pins – 1) Input pin
where maximum 40 V DC can be supplied, 2) Output pin which provides output voltage in the
range of 1.25 V to 37 V and 3) Adjust pin which is used to vary the output voltage corresponding
to the applied input voltage. For input up to 40 V, the output can vary from 1.25 V to 37 V.
For setting the desired voltage at the output of LM317, resistive voltage divider circuit is used
between the output pin and ground. By the effect of this configuration, the voltage at the output
pin can be adjusted. The value of resistive voltage divider needs to be chosen in such a way that
it can provide required voltage range at the output.
Our desired voltage output is 0-30V DC. As mentioned above use voltage divider with the
voltage regulator to get the desires output. In our design we use potentiometer in the place of one
the resistor in voltage divider circuit that allows us to change voltage according to our
requirement.

# Short Circuit Protection
A diode is connected between the voltage input and voltage output terminals of 317 IC so that it
can prevent the external capacitor from discharging through the IC during an input short circuit.
When the input is shorted then the cathode of the diode is at ground potential. The anode
terminal of the diode is at high voltage since C2 is fully charged. Therefore, in such a case, the 
diode is forward biased and all the discharging current from capacitor passes through the diode
to the ground. This saves the LM317 IC from the back current.

# Circuit Simulations
We use proteus for the simulation of variable DC power supply.
